---
title:  "Named Entity Recognition from scratch Part A""
categories: ["Python"]
tags: ["machine learning"]
mathjax: fasle
---

# Introduction
In this post I am sharing my approach from participating in the [MedDoProf](https://temu.bsc.es/meddoprof/) data science challenge. 
It is a named entity recognition challenge organized during Summer of 2021. I found it interesting because the articles 
are in Spanish. I don't speak Spanish, so I wanted to approach the problem. Also they come from the medical domain. I have worked with eCommerce, CRM and academic datasets mostly in the past. 


The data are available at [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/record/4775741#.YSjuXdMzbRw).

TL:DR
Code for this blogpost on my [github SpanishNER repo](https://github.com/balikasg/SpanishNER).

# Plan

My plan for this challenge was simple: 
- Get the data
- Build an end-to-end approach with a baseline model 
- Iterate

When I started I was planning to 
- use spacy for pre-processing
- use a linear CRF as a model
- iterate a bit on the features
- build a deep NN model and compare
- spend only a few hours or a couple of nights on this task

At the end: 
- I managed to submit a working solution
- I did not build a deep neural network

I found myself spending most of the time to work between the different formats: 
- Get the input format in a format suitable for NER
- Write the prediction in the way the organizers requested
This proved to be more time-consuming that I originally thought because the organizers gave the while documents and the entities where identified by start and end indexes (and the text between those indexes). 
This requires some work, thought and iterations as we want tokenization to respect the limits provided by the organizers for start and end indexes.   

In this first post I will discuss the data preparation from the format of the organizers to a format that can be used for learning. Recall my plan is to use a linear CRF, so I need features in the "traditional" sense: information that described the words. This can be the word itself, linguistic features (part-of-speech, lemmas, ..) and some morphological features (is number, position in text, capital letters, ...). 

I found `spacy` to be excellent as it can do all these things with its nlp pipeline. 
